API Reference walkthrough (#1230)
wandb/docs: content/ref/python/python_api_walkthrough.md

---
title: API Walkthrough
weight: 1
---

Learn when and how to use different W&B APIs to track, share, and manage model artifacts in your machine learning workflows. This page covers logging experiments, generating reports, and accessing logged data using the appropriate W&B API for each task.

> You'll use the following W&B packages:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Weights and Biases offers the following APIs:
```

* W&B Python SDK (`wandb.sdk`): Log and monitor experiments during training.
* W&B Public API (`wandb.apis.public`): Query and analyze logged experiment data.
* W&B Reports API (`wandb.wandb-workspaces`): Create reports to summarize findings.

## Sign up and create an API key

> To authenticate your machine with W&B, generate an API key from your user profile or at [wandb.ai/authorize](https://wandb.ai/authorize). Copy the API key and store it securely.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Sign up and create an API key

To authenticate your machine with W&B, you must first generate an API key at [wandb.ai/authorize](https://wandb.ai/authorize). Copy the API key and store it securely.
```

## Install and import packages

Install the W&B library and some other packages you will need for this walkthrough.  

```python

> !pip install wandb

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install wandb
```

I'm unclear why I keep seeing this exclamation mark in terminal commands, usually `pip`, in our docs?

Author: Ah. This is how you run shell commands in a Python notebook. It is there because this file is created from a notebook. 🤦

Author: (Removed)

```

Import W&B Python SDK:

```python
import wandb
```

Specify the entity of your team in the following code block:

```python
TEAM_ENTITY = "<Team_Entity>" # Replace with your team entity
PROJECT = "my-awesome-project"
```

## Train model

The following code simulates a basic machine learning workflow: training a model, logging metrics, and saving the model as an artifact.

> You'll use the W&B Python SDK (`wandb.sdk`) to interact with W&B during training. Log the loss using [`wandb.log`]({{< relref path="./run.md#log" >}}) method, then save the trained model as an artifact. Create an artifact with [`wandb.Artifact`]({{< relref path="./artifact.md" >}}) and add the model file using [`Artifact.add_file`]({{< relref path="./artifact.md#add_file" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the W&B Python SDK (`wandb.sdk`) to interact with W&B during training. Log the loss using [`wandb.log`]({{< relref path="./run.md#log" >}}), then save the trained model as an artifact using [`wandb.Artifact`]({{< relref path="./artifact.md" >}}), adding the model file using [`Artifact.add_file`]({{< relref path="./artifact.md#add_file" >}}).
```

# Simulate training loop
for epoch in range(config["epochs"]):
    xb = weights + noise  # Simulated input training data
    yb = weights + noise * 2  # Simulated target output (double the input noise)
    
    y_pred = model(xb)  # Model prediction
    loss = (yb - y_pred) ** 2  # Mean Squared Error loss

    print(f"epoch={epoch}, loss={y_pred}")
    # Log epoch and loss to W&B
    run.log({
        "epoch": epoch,
        "loss": loss,
    })

# Unique name for the model artifact
model_artifact_name = f"model-{wandb.run.id}"  

# Local path to save the simulated model file
PATH = "model.txt" 

# Save model locally
with open(PATH, "w") as f:
    f.write(str(weights)) # Saving model weights to a file

# Create an artifact object
# Add locally saved model to artifact object
artifact = wandb.Artifact(name=model_artifact_name, type="model", description="My trained model")
artifact.add_file(local_path=PATH)
artifact.save()

# Explicitly tell W&B to finish the run
run.finish()
```

The key takeaways from the previous code block are:
* Use `wandb.log` to log metrics during training.
* Use `wandb.Artifact` to save models (datasets, and so forth) as an artifact to your W&B project.

> > Note: This example uses `wandb.init()` without a context manager for simplicity. It is considered best practice to use a context manager (`with wandb.init() as run:`) to ensure that the run is properly closed after logging and avoids leaving open runs that can consume resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{{< alert >}}
This example uses `wandb.init()` without a context manager for simplicity. It is considered best practice to use a context manager (`with wandb.init() as run:`) to ensure that the run is properly closed after logging and avoids leaving open runs that can consume resources.
{{< /alert >}}
```

Even better: Just change the code to use a context manager. :P

Author: I go back and forth on this. Showing the best practice _might_ make the for loop for training + logging look more complicated looking than it really is?  It'll look something like this, what do you think?:

```python
with wandb.init(project=PROJECT, entity=TEAM_ENTITY, config=config) as run:
  # Simulate training loop
  for epoch in range(config["epochs"]):
      xb = weights + noise  # Simulated input training data
      yb = weights + noise * 2  # Simulated target output (double the input noise)
  
      y_pred = model(xb)  # Model prediction
      loss = (yb - y_pred) ** 2  # Mean Squared Error loss
  
      print(f"epoch={epoch}, loss={y_pred}")
      # Log epoch and loss to W&B
      run.log({
          "epoch": epoch,
          "loss": loss,
      })

  # Unique name for the model artifact
  model_artifact_name = f"model-{wandb.run.id}"
  
  # Local path to save the simulated model file
  PATH = "model.txt"
  
  # Save model locally
  with open(PATH, "w") as f:
      f.write(str(weights)) # Saving model weights to a file
  
  # Create an artifact object
  # Add locally saved model to artifact object
  artifact = wandb.Artifact(name=model_artifact_name, type="model", description="My trained model")
  artifact.add_file(local_path=PATH)
  artifact.save()
```

Reviewer: I think it's great and that the SDK team will appreciate us following best practice in the reference area for the SDK. :)

Author: 😎

Use [`wandb.use_artifact`]({{< relref path="./run.md#use_artifact" >}}) to retrieve the artifact from your project and prepare it for publication in the Model registry. `wandb.use_artifact` serves two key purposes:
* Retrieves the artifact object from your project.

> * Marks the artifact as an input to the run, ensuring reproducibility and traceability. See [Create and view lineage map]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/lineage/" >}}) for details.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Use [`wandb.use_artifact`]({{< relref path="./run.md#use_artifact" >}}) to retrieve the artifact from your project and prepare it for publication in the Model registry. `wandb.use_artifact` serves two key purposes:
* Retrieves the artifact object from your project.
* Marks the artifact as an input to the run, ensuring reproducibility and traceability. See [Create and view lineage map]({{< relref path="/guides/core/registry/lineage/" >}}) for details.
```

Is this reiterating the summary you just provided circa line 102? Maybe zap that one and go with this, which is more detailed.

Author: Not necessarily. They are different steps. The first (~102) describes logging artifact to W&B. 

This  paragraph describes getting an artifact from W&B to then use.

Reviewer: OK. Just seems a bit long and like we're "[preparing to fast forward](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4UCAJwq4yIM)" -- if there are optimizations for length or ways to combine caption/summary blocks like these two then it's a good thing IMO

Author: It is admittedly long. But they are distinct steps that folks need to be aware of and complete in order to use the registry and artifacts in general.  (One that has historically caused confusion). :(

Reviewer: Alright, let's go with it then. I'm not willing to block on it and we are going to follow up with Lazydoc/nav-refits anyway. Let's see how this feels then. For now, :shipit:  :)

## Publish the model to the Model registry

> To share the model with others in your organization, publish it to a [collection]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/create_collection" >}}) using `wandb.link_artifact`. The following code links the artifact to the [core Model registry]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/registry_types/#core-registry" >}}), making it accessible to your team.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Publish the model to the Model registry

To share the model with others in your organization, publish it to a [collection]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/create_collection" >}}) using `wandb.link_artifact`. The following code links the artifact to the [core Model registry]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/registry_types/#core-registry" >}}), making it accessible to your team.
```

Pet peeve when there's no blank line between the heading and the paragraph text

```python
# Artifact name specifies the specific artifact version within our team's project
artifact_name = f'{TEAM_ENTITY}/{PROJECT}/{model_artifact_name}:v0'
print("Artifact name: ", artifact_name)

REGISTRY_NAME = "Model" # Name of the registry in W&B
COLLECTION_NAME = "DemoModels"  # Name of the collection in the registry

# Create a target path for our artifact in the registry
target_path = f"wandb-registry-{REGISTRY_NAME}/{COLLECTION_NAME}"
print("Target path: ", target_path)

run = wandb.init(entity=TEAM_ENTITY, project=PROJECT)
model_artifact = run.use_artifact(artifact_or_name=artifact_name, type="model")
run.link_artifact(artifact=model_artifact, target_path=target_path)
run.finish()
```

> Within the Registry App, you should see the model artifact within the DemoModels collection in the Model registry. You can click on it to view its details, including the version history, [lineage map]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/lineage/" >}}), and other [metadata]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/registry_cards/" >}}). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After running `link_artifact()`, the model artifact will be in the `DemoModels` collection in your registry. From there, you can view details such as the version history, [lineage map]({{< relref path="/guides/core/registry/lineage/" >}}), and other [metadata]({{< relref path="/guides/core/registry/registry_cards/" >}}). 
```

Author: Mild adjustment: Keeping "Model registry" since there are multiple registries a user will use throughout the ML process.

> For additional information on how to link artifacts to a registry, see [Link artifacts to a registry]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/link_version/" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For additional information on how to link artifacts to a registry, see [Link artifacts to a registry]({{< relref path="/guides/core/registry/link_version/" >}}).
```

## Retrieve model artifact from registry for inference

> To use a model for inference, use `wandb.use_artifact` to retrieve the published artifact from the Model registry. This returns an artifact object that you can then use the [`Artifact.download`]({{< relref path="./artifact.md#download" >}}) method to download the artifact.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a model for inference, use `use_artifact()` to retrieve the published artifact from the registry. This returns an artifact object that you can then use [`download()`]({{< relref path="./artifact.md#download" >}}) to download the artifact to a local file.
```

```python
REGISTRY_NAME = "Model"  # Name of the registry in W&B
COLLECTION_NAME = "DemoModels"  # Name of the collection in the registry
VERSION = 0 # Version of the artifact to retrieve

model_artifact_name = f"wandb-registry-{REGISTRY_NAME}/{COLLECTION_NAME}:v{VERSION}"
print(f"Model artifact name: {model_artifact_name}")

run = wandb.init(entity=TEAM_ENTITY, project=PROJECT)
registry_model = run.use_artifact(artifact_or_name=model_artifact_name)
local_model_path = registry_model.download()
```

> For more information on how to retrieve artifacts from a registry, see [Download an artifact from a registry]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/download_use_artifact/" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on how to retrieve artifacts from a registry, see [Download an artifact from a registry]({{< relref path="/guides/core/registry/download_use_artifact/" >}}).
```

Depending on your machine learning framework, you may need to recreate the model architecture before loading the weights. This is left as an exercise for the reader, as it depends on the specific framework and model you are using. 

## Share your finds with a report

> Create and share a [report]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/reports/_index.md" >}}) to summarize your work. To create a report programmatically, use the [W&B Reports API]({{< relref path="./wandb_workspaces/reports.md" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create and share a [report]({{< relref path="/guides/core/reports/" >}}) to summarize your work. To create a report programmatically, use the [W&B Reports API]({{< relref path="./wandb_workspaces/reports.md" >}}).
```

`/guides` is at the root of the site, no need for `../` and you don't need to add `_index.md` at the end.

First, install the W&B Reports API:

```python

> !pip install wandb wandb-workspaces -qqq

Reviewer: ```suggestion
pip install wandb wandb-workspaces -qqq
```

```

> Next, import the package:
> 
> 
> ```python
> import wandb_workspaces.reports.v2 as wr
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

The following code block creates a report with multiple blocks, including markdown, panel grids, and more. You can customize the report by adding more blocks or changing the content of existing blocks. 

The output of the code block prints a link to the URL report created. You can open this link in your browser to view the report. 

> ```python
> experiment_summary = """This is a summary of the experiment conducted to train a simple model using W&B."""

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```python
import wandb_workspaces.reports.v2 as wr

experiment_summary = """This is a summary of the experiment conducted to train a simple model using W&B."""
```

Author: I left this as a separate step because I thought it might highlight that we are using a different library. If you don't think that'll do the job, I can update it to ^^

Reviewer: I just think in terms of UX the "copy/paste-ability" is enhanced by keeping the code block contiguous; you can use a comment for highlighting the library name if it's sticking in your craw still but I think the fact that it's in the code as-is and will break if you change it will also help keep people on the path. :)

Author: Good point!

dataset_info = """The dataset used for training consists of synthetic data generated by a simple model."""
model_info = """The model is a simple linear regression model that predicts output based on input data with some noise."""

report = wr.Report(
    project=PROJECT,
    entity=TEAM_ENTITY,
    title="My Awesome Model Training Report",
    description=experiment_summary,
    blocks= [
        wr.TableOfContents(),
        wr.H2("Experiment Summary"),
        wr.MarkdownBlock(text=experiment_summary),
        wr.H2("Dataset Information"),
        wr.MarkdownBlock(text=dataset_info),
        wr.H2("Model Information"),
        wr.MarkdownBlock(text = model_info),
        wr.PanelGrid(
            panels=[
                wr.LinePlot(title="Train Loss", x="Step", y=["loss"], title_x="Step", title_y="Loss")
                ],
            ),  
    ]

)

# Save the report to W&B
report.save()
```

> For more information on how to create a report programmatically or how to create a report interactively with the W&B App, see [Create a report]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/reports/create-a-report.md" >}}) in the W&B Docs Developer guide. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on how to create a report programmatically or how to create a report interactively with the W&B App, see [Create a report]({{< relref path="/guides/core/reports/create-a-report.md" >}}) in the W&B Docs Developer guide. 
```

## Query the registry

> Use the [W&B Public APIs]({{< relref path="./public-api/_index.md" >}}) to query, analyze, and manage historical data from W&B. This can be useful for tracking the lineage of artifacts, comparing different versions, and analyzing the performance of models over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the [W&B Public APIs]({{< relref path="./public-api/" >}}) to query, analyze, and manage historical data from W&B. This can be useful for tracking the lineage of artifacts, comparing different versions, and analyzing the performance of models over time.
```

The following code block demonstrates how to query the Model registry for all artifacts in a specific collection. It retrieves the collection and iterates through its versions, printing out the name and version of each artifact.

```python
import wandb

# Initialize wandb API
api = wandb.Api()

# Find all artifact versions that contains the string `model` and 
# has either the tag `text-classification` or an `latest` alias
registry_filters = {
    "name": {"$regex": "model"}
}

# Use logical $or operator to filter artifact versions
version_filters = {
    "$or": [
        {"tag": "text-classification"},
        {"alias": "latest"}
    ]
}

# Returns an iterable of all artifact versions that match the filters
artifacts = api.registries(filter=registry_filters).collections().versions(filter=version_filters)

# Print out the name, collection, aliases, tags, and created_at date of each artifact found
for art in artifacts:
    print(f"artifact name: {art.name}")
    print(f"collection artifact belongs to: { art.collection.name}")
    print(f"artifact aliases: {art.aliases}")
    print(f"tags attached to artifact: {art.tags}")
    print(f"artifact created at: {art.created_at}\n")
```

> For more information on querying the registry, see the [Query registry items with MongoDB-style queries]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/registry/search_registry.md#query-registry-items-with-mongodb-style-queries" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information on querying the registry, see the [Query registry items with MongoDB-style queries]({{< relref path="/guides/core/registry/search_registry.md#query-registry-items-with-mongodb-style-queries" >}}).
```

> 
> ## Next steps
> This guide introduced the various W&B APIs for tracking, sharing, and managing model artifacts in machine learning workflows. Key takeaways include:
> 
> * W&B Python SDK (wandb.sdk): Use during training to log experiments, track metrics, and save model artifacts.
> * W&B Public API (wandb.apis.public): Query, analyze, and manage logged experiment data and historical artifacts.
> * W&B Reports API (wandb.wandb-workspaces): Programmatically create reports to summarize findings.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Seems to just restate the intro, I think we can skip this

> 
> Next, explore more features of the W&B ecosystem:
> 
> 1. Read the [W&B Integration tutorials]({{< relref path="guides/integrations/" >}}) that combine W&B with frameworks like PyTorch, libraries like Hugging Face, and services like SageMaker.
> 1. Automate hyperparameter searches and optimize models with [W&B Sweeps]({{< relref "/guides/models/sweeps/" >}}).
> 1. Analyze runs, visualize model predictions, and share insights on a [central dashboard]({{< relref "/guides/models/tables/" >}}).
> 1. Create an [automation]({{< relref path="../../guides/core/automations/_index.md" >}}) to trigger workflow steps, such as automated model testing and deployment.
> 1. Visit [W&B AI Academy](https://wandb.ai/site/courses/) to learn about LLMs, MLOps, and W&B Models through hands-on courses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

These don't seem like next steps for someone exploring the API reference
